[AGENTONB-2311] Monitor controlplane components for Talos Linux (#32289)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/containers/kubernetes/control_plane.md

1. Datadog Agent v7.69+

> **Note**: `etcd` not supported on versions 4.0-4.13,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: `etcd` is not supported on versions 4.0-4.13.
```

  -p='[{"op": "add", "path": "/spec/install/spec/deployments/0/spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-", "value": "--introspectionEnabled=true"}]'
```

Since this feature is enabled by default, you can deploy a minimal DatadogAgent spec.

> Enable `features.clusterChecks.useClusterChecksRunners` to schedule checks there; otherwise, control plane checks will run on the Node Agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable `features.clusterChecks.useClusterChecksRunners` to schedule checks there; otherwise, control plane checks run on the Node Agent.
```

The Datadog Cluster Agent schedules the checks as endpoint checks and dispatches them to Cluster Check Runners.

## Kubernetes on Talos Linux {#TalosLinux}

Helm is the recommended installation method for Talos Linux by setting the flag `providers.talos.enabled` to `true`.

### API server

The API server integration is automatically configured. The Datadog Agent discovers it automatically.

### Etcd

> By providing read access to the Etcd certificates located on the host, the Datadog Agent check can communicate with Etcd and start collecting Etcd metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By providing read access to the etcd certificates located on the host, the Datadog Agent check can communicate with etcd and start collecting etcd metrics.
```

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="datadog-values.yaml" >}}
datadog:
  apiKey: <DATADOG_API_KEY>
  appKey: <DATADOG_APP_KEY>
  clusterName: <CLUSTER_NAME>
  kubelet:
    tlsVerify: false
  ignoreAutoConfig:
  - etcd
  confd:
    etcd.yaml: |-
      # Trick the Agent to only run this check on the host where etcd is running
      # by using `ad_identifiers` for a pod that would only be running on a control-plane node.
      # This is to avoid errors when the Agent is running on worker nodes.

>       # Another approach would be to run a dummy pod on master node and use it for `ad_identifiers`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # Another approach is to run a minimal pod on the master node and use it for `ad_identifiers`.
```

      ad_identifiers:
        - kube-scheduler
      instances:
          # This is the node IP where metrics are exposed because kube-scheduler runs in host network mode.
          # Otherwise, IP could be hardcoded to the master node IP (also in environment variable `DD_KUBERNETES_KUBELET_HOST`).
        - prometheus_url: https://%%host%%:2379/metrics
          tls_ca_cert: /host/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/ca.crt
          tls_cert: /host/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/server.crt
          tls_private_key: /host/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd/server.key
agents:

>   # Tolerations are needed to be scheduled on control-plane nodes running ETCD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # Tolerations are needed to be scheduled on control-plane nodes running etcd
```

          ssl_verify: false
          bearer_token_auth: true
agents:
  tolerations:
  - key: node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane
    operator: Exists
    effect: NoSchedule
  volumes:
    - hostPath:
        path: /system/secrets/etcd
      name: etcd-certs
  volumeMounts:
    - name: etcd-certs
      mountPath: /host/etc/kubernetes/pki/etcd
      readOnly: true
providers:
  talos:
    enabled: true
{{< /code-block >}}

**Notes:**

- The `ssl_verify` field in the `kube_controller_manager` and `kube_scheduler` configuration needs to be set to `false` when using self-signed certificates.
- When targeting secure ports, the `bind-address` option in your Controller Manager and Scheduler configuration must be reachable by the Datadog Agent. Apply the following patch to control-plane nodes at cluster generation or for running Talos nodes `talosctl patch mc -n <control-plane-node1,control-plane-node2> --patch @controlplane-datadog-monitoring-patch.yaml`:

{{< code-block lang="yaml" filename="controlplane-datadog-monitoring-patch.yaml" >}}
cluster:
  controllerManager:
    extraArgs:
      bind-address: 0.0.0.0
  scheduler:
    extraArgs:
      bind-address: 0.0.0.0

> {{< /code-block >}}

Author: This is perfectly accurate and indeed conveys my intent. Thanks!
